---
layout: post
title: "Belief is Deceptive"
date: 2017-12-17
tags: [politicblog]
---


I wasn't planning on writing another post before the holiday season but I recently watched a very interesting episode on Netflix by Reggie Yates titled [UK: Gay & Under Attack](https://www.netflix.com/title/80191975). It was a really powerful look at what being homosexual or transgender is like in the UK, but from a minority perspective. I was a little surprised that the least accepting communities were those that were of African and Asian descent. In particular those from the Caribbean, African, and Arab countries. It struck me as sort of paradoxical that we fight for these communities' rights to be who they are and part of that means propagating hate towards a specific minority. This paradox and the episode by [Reggie Yates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reggie_Yates) is really the catalyst of this post. Moving forward I'm going to start off with a bold statement and work towards providing background and data as to why I think this is the case.

**"If you are part of a religion that preaches love but imposes restraints on that love based on homosexuality, then that is no religion of love, no matter how much you try to 'tame', 'dress up', and 'cloak' your message (saying you love the person but hate the sin counts here). It is hate. Being gay or trans is NOT A CHOICE."**   

The main conjecture that I think many modern iterations of Christianity and Muslim faith propagate today is this notion that being gay is a choice. Yet, this argument stems from a fundamental misunderstanding of genes and how those genes may interact with the environment. Now, it may not be too surprising that this is misunderstood since learning genetics and the complexity behind host environment interactions is not something that is probably high on either religion's agenda for the vast majority of denominations and sects that exist. So lets start diving into why being gay is not a choice.

I recently finished a book called, ["The Gene"](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/27276428-the-gene) by [Siddhartha Mukherjee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siddhartha_Mukherjee) and within it he covers how the identification of the ["Gay" gene](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=dean+hamer+xq28) came to be. Before this though there had been some tantalizing information that there was a strong genetic component to being gay based on [twin studies](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/article-abstract/495588?redirect=true). It shouldn't be understated how much impact these studies had on changing the conversation away from choice in western society. It was monumental...So next time someone says science isn't important or that it doesn't matter point them towards these studies and how it changed the way, we in western society, approach being gay.

The bigger question though is why with all this information and knowledge do religious groups still propagate the idea of choice? 

One explanation is possibly due to the confusion over sex and gender. Sex is binary. Being male and being female really isn't all that big of a difference, biologically speaking. I was really surprised when reading [The Gene](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/27276428-the-gene) that a single gene, [SRY](https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/SRY), controls sex determination. That's it. One single gene is the difference. If its on or off it determines if you are male or female. Yet, [gender](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/gender) as it is classically defined happens on a continuum and also can have societal influences. So how do genes play any role in something that looks so much like the environment is the key player? This is what I think one of the keys to why being gay is still consistently viewed as a choice.  There is a fundamental misunderstanding that many people don't understand that an attribute can be genetic and still be influenced by the environment. Yet, even here there is still more misunderstanding that when scientists say environment we are always referring to controllable influences. That there is a key difference. Many times when we, as scientists, talk about environment we are referring to things that are random events that are unpredictable, that can occur as one grows up. An example of this would be one twin getting a cut and another not getting a cut from falling. The genes dictate how one responds to the event but the event itself can be as innocuous as tripping over one's two feet. It is these environmental effects in combination with the genes that we are born with that lead to the normal distribution of gender that we see in society today. 

So, yes the environment can have an impact but you can't control this because in essence it is the randomness of life/society itself and you also can't control the genes that you are born with (well at least [not yet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRISPR)). Therefore, just on this information alone being gay **IS NOT A CHOICE**. Why is this message continuing to be propagated in religious circles? (*note: We could even broaden this to encompass many societies around the world, if we so choose to*). 

Well, another common argument is that you don't see this behaviour in nature. Again, this stems from a fundamental misunderstanding of nature and just not looking to closely at what different animal groups do (see [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_animals_displaying_homosexual_behavior) and [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homosexual_behavior_in_animals) to get you started). Then again, if my childhood was any indication of typical Christian upbringing, you spend more time memorizing versus of the bible then you do talking about science, nature, and morality. With the further privatization of schools, so you can choose what message you want your children to hear, the loss of emphasis on these important topics will only continue. 

A final argument that people like to use to sound like they understand science is that homosexuality is not Darwinian evolution and so it can't be natural. With the crux of the argument being that because it does not provide a reproductive advantage it could not possible be selected for. Well, I don't want to be blunt but see [here](http://www.iflscience.com/plants-and-animals/scientists-discover-evolutionary-advantage-homosexual-sex/) for a starting point as to why this is wrong. Even independent of this finding though this argument betrays a serious misunderstanding of Darwinian evolution, with the simplest reason being that it could persist because heterozygotes are favored over homozygotes.

Now with even more information there should be little doubt that homosexuality is **NOT A CHOICE**. Yet, why do we keep bringing it back into play. I don't mean those who are 60's, 70's, etc. years old, I mean the "hip" and "trendy" youth pastors or imams who dress up their message to suggest that their preaching includes everyone, as long as you give up your homosexuality because it is a choice. What is worse is that they convince others that this is the case or that god can reverse this process. This intolerance runs everywhere in religious circles, perhaps even higher in those who are immigrants from extremely religious countries. 

It might be easy to say education is the key but that is only part of the problem. I know what I know because I tangentially overlap with many areas that involve genomics and genetics. This knowledge is not commonly taught or explained. Even worse schools shun many of these topics to not offend an individual's belief system. So it is paradoxical that in a society built on challenging ideas we do not want to challenge religious ideals that do great harm to many social justice efforts. 

This is the problem we find ourselves in now. The right, as much as I am far away from them on many issues, have a point. Their approach is terrible and based in fear but we still need to acknowledge the fact that they have a valid point; that our ideals do not align with many of those immigrating to Western countries. I might get a little bit of flak for this but these ideas ruin people's lives and are not based on facts but opinion and beliefs. The approach on the right might create more outward animosity and terrorists but the left's approach erodes the idea of what facts are by not confronting the inherent and terrible ideas of the marginalized groups that they try to protect. Both create an endless cycle in which we find ourselves in now, where facts become relative. One possible natural extension of this is that Western education can be seen as Western indoctrination against their beliefs. One example, that may seem benign, is the propagation of acupuncture, cupping, and other types of eastern remedies as valid techniques in medicine without any valid evidence because people **BELIEVE** that it helps them personally. Yet, science isn't about the world as you see it or believe it should be. Nor is it about what your experience is. It is simply about the way the world is...

I am using homosexuality and religion as an example because it is an easy one to quickly show a disconnect between fact and belief. Belief or faith can be good in certain contexts but left unchecked and allowed to run amok you get people who sound so sure and look so pristine hawking ideas that do not stand on any observable fact. So I will end with my quote from earlier because I think this belief has been thoroughly debunked.
 
**"If you are part of a religion that preaches love but imposes restraints on that love based on homosexuality, then that is no religion of love, no matter how much you try to 'tame', 'dress up', and 'cloak' your message. It is hate. Being gay or trans is NOT A CHOICE."**



     

