---
layout: post
title: "The Poor Are Not the Problem...The Rich Are"
date: 2017-11-12
tags: [politicblog]
---

My Facebook feed has been bombarded recently with posts on the homeless and poor. There have been posts talking about why individuals care about the plight of the homeless, just as long as they put the shelters in the “right” place. All the while I have still seen posts on how our capital gains tax needs to be lowered or how our finance minister doesn’t understand enough about how taxing middle-class individuals will hurt Canada. As surprising as this may sound these are all somewhat interrelated issues that really highlight the vast inequality of the current capitalist society we live in. One thing is for certain, people should be paying attention to the information that was leaked by the Panama papers and the more recent Paradise papers. And by attention I do not mean looking for your favorite person to hate on (e.g. Trudeau, etc.) I mean what it generally says about the top 0.000001% of the world. Let’s start breaking a few things down though as to why these are related issues.

Before I get started I will consistently refer to the “middle” class. However, I strongly believe that this is an outdated term. This phrase is generally used to encompass a group of individuals that make between a 5 figure and 6 figure salary. Yet, this grouping, I think most people would agree, is ridiculous since what someone can afford on a $60,000 income versus a $250,000 income is a night and day difference. The top end of this group has been changed where needed to help support all sorts of tax schemes as well. As an example, Obama era legislation drew the middle-class maximum as $250,000. However, Trump era legislation puts the top end of the middle class at $450,000. On top of this, if you are in the group of people that consider “middle” class as being able to afford a house, a car, etc. then this is going to change the range by province/state. So, you tell me how one makes a sensible policy based on such an absurdly nebulous grouping?

Enough about the pedantic statement of the “middle” class, lets really start into the main components of my thought process. Let’s come back to the offshore accounts of the rich highlighted in the Panama and Paradise papers. First, no matter how you cut it that money that is being held in off shore accounts does not get taxed or gets taxed at a much, much, much lower rate. What this means is that the middle class, the top 5% of individuals now need to shoulder a larger burden to support the current system. Is this fair? No. But the rich have gotten away with pushing the burden of the tax payments to the middle class by effectively “throwing them a bone”.  They get small benefits in the form of tax breaks that really help the top 0.0000001% but marginally helps the middle class while not helping the working class and poor at all.

A good example of this is the capital gains tax. More than ~90% of the population would not benefit from tax breaks due to a reduction in this tax (unless of course you have fallen for the terrible idea of trickle down economics). It benefits the middle class a little, but you know who really benefits? It isn’t the top 5%, even though they get some help, it benefits the top 0.000001% a lot. So, we are left with individuals in the middle class saying things like, “it is better to have something then nothing at all”. All this approach does is further re-emphasize the status quo. The middle class will never make enough money to balance out the money that is being lost by the benefits given to the top 0.000001%. So, the cycle will keep getting more vicious and more will be asked of the middle class.

I came out against those that were upset by the Trudeau tax changes because the battle being fought is the wrong one. The argument that should have been waged isn’t that people should be allowed to take advantage of loopholes but that if the middle class is going to be held to these higher standards then the top 0.000001% should also be to. There needs to be more ways of being able to tax the top 0.000001% not more ways in which the middle class can use loop holes that benefit them a little but the top 0.000001% a lot. The message was always about how the middle-class person was going to be hurt but these individuals are literally fighting to keep a loop hole in place that drastically helps the rich move money. They are literally siding with those that want to keep the tax burden firmly planted on the middle class.

So, what does this have to do with the poor? Well, quite simply everything. The middle class might be getting larger but so is our population. There are also more and more people that have very little. Many questions have consistently been popping into my head as I have been observing the many Facebook posts on taxes and the poor. How do we tackle global climate change without having an education system that equally educates regardless of background? How do we provide healthcare to everyone that needs it without an educated citizenship? How do we fight the tide of fake news or fix the problems of democracy if individuals can’t even put food on the table for their next meal? 

The problem is that the ultra rich have painted these individuals as lazy or ungrateful or as drug addicts. This is in part to reduce the social programs that are designed to help these individuals in their time of need. A good reason for doing this is that there is less expenditure needed on the governments behalf which ultimately means it doesn’t have to ask for as much taxes, which means they can take more for themselves while keeping the tax burden squarely on the middle class. This allows for the mirage that society is still functioning normally or better than it has been while slowly eroding away the very things that make our society what it is. Many of the poor are not drug addicts, but it is easier to think of them like that. They are not lazy, but it is easier to think that they never tried earnestly to get a job. They are also not ungrateful: they have been truly humbled and have had their dignity destroyed. A comment popped up on my news feed about how modular housing in Marpole would make the area like Hastings. I cringe at these sorts of posts because that is painting the poor with a very wide brush stroke. There have also been posts about how more needles will be picked up by schools because of these modular housing units. This is another wide brush stroke painting all those that need housing as drug addicts or users. There are a lot of well to do people that abuse drugs just as much as the poor. They just have more resources for a good PR campaign. 

In my mind these issues are interrelated, and we really need to start demanding our “leaders” of industry – the Chip Wilsons, the Arlene Dickinsons, the Kevin O’Learys, the Robert Herjavecs to start pitching in more not less. Although it is great that they have profited, how much money do they really need? Do we really want to be selecting for individuals whose belief is “money is everything”? Do we really want to select for individuals that only work for money? The middle class is in love with these individuals yet everything that they do is to throw more of the burden of paying for society on these individuals. We listen to all these self-made entrepreneurs as if their advice is sacred, yet we forget about the 1000s that had to fail to yield the one success. What is the rate of a start up being successful? How many of those people didn’t work hard enough? Didn’t sacrifice enough? Didn’t “want” it enough? How many of these successes would have been possible without government funding? Government research? Government subsidies? The whole point of all this government support is that when you do become successful you give back to the community in the form of taxes. Not for you to squirrel it away for yourself. Or to use it to build giant mansions or buy 3-4 houses.

I have a lot of middle class friends and what they have been bombarding my news feed with is upsetting because it is exactly the type of BS that helps those that need it least. If the only thing showing up on your news feed is animal movies and articles about being taxed less, you are the definition of the person the rich are looking for to continue to support their pillaging of the public coffers. 
