---
layout: post
title: "My Experience Switching to a Linux Laptop"
date: 2017-11-04
tags: [generalblog]
---

# My First Linux
### What I've learned a month in...

First off I apologize for being behind in getting this post off. I have been running behind with work and in general have agreed to do one too many things. At any rate I have some time now to write down my experience with switching to a linux laptop for my research work. I had been using a Windows 10 HP Spectre system up to this point. The bash with Ubuntu on Windows 10 is a really cool feature to work with but I wanted to try something new that was not named Mac. I had heard good things about System76 and decided to talk my current supervisor into letting me get one of these systems for my work laptop. If you are curious the system I choose to go with can be found [here](https://system76.com/cart/configure/galp3).

 The company was very easy to work with. They got our purchase order together in no time at all and the laptop arrived within 7 days at the research center that I work. It was easy to interface with our High Performance Computing cluster and getting started with R, R Studio, Dropbox and One Drive was not that difficult at all. I have some troubles with the VPN connection where I can't access manuscripts at home but with time I think I'll be able to sort that out. Speaking about manuscripts though, no problem with me getting my reference manager, Zotero, to work on the linux machine. 

 Other components that were easy to install were an alternative web browser to Firefox. I like Chrome personally and you can set up the `apt-get` system to get updates for the Chrome browser if you want. I also was worried that Spotify may not have a linux version, but I was happily proven wrong. I also happened upon a cool piece of software called [Rambox](http://rambox.pro/). This integrates my e-mail, Slack, twitter, etc. all into a single system on my linux platform. It has just been over a month now and I can honestly say that I actually find it really fun using the linux laptop to do my work on. Everything runs really smoothly. As a reference point what I use on a daily basis are: GitHub, RStudio, bash, and markdown. I will from time to time use python and julia if I am feeling adventurous...

 There are some drawbacks though. Depending on how your institution is set up getting things like printers to work might be difficult. In general there is no driver problems with the linux machine. However, our institution recently implemented some security features which do not have linux support for. You can use the University's VPN to get around this...but remember how I told you I was having troubles with my institutes VPN... The other thing is that I actually like Microsoft Powerpoint. Although LibreOffice is nice AND free there are things that I am just not used to yet that I prefer Powerpoint for. One thing this has been helping me do is move more of my work over to google drive, so I guess it is not all bad. I know Microsoft has their own version of this so I might give that a try as well. 

The only other aspect that I think might be difficult for people is that if they are highly integrated into the Mac ecosystem (e.g. iTunes, etc.). There isn't really any easy way to transfer everything over and that might be a deal breaker for many people. ALthough there are a lot of resources online for this specific problem, see [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/267136/importing-itunes-music-library-in-rhythmbox) and [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/linux4noobs/comments/2e6lw6/switching_from_mac_to_linuxlinux_mint_how_do_i/) as examples. So it is do able and the community of linux users is continuously growing.

  Overall, I really like using the linux for work. I have a few small problems but these are institutional so may not be at all relevant to your situation. If you are thinking about making the switch I think there is enough support in place at this time to make the transition relatively painless.

Hopefully, if you are thinking of making a switch, this little report has helped clear up some questions that you may have had.

