---
layout: post
title: "Ending the Year on a High"
date: 2017-12-09
tags: [scienceblog]
---

### Preamble
It has been roughly a week since I wrote my last blog post on [my experience interviewing for a bioinformatics position at a company](http://marcsze.github.io/blog/2017/12/03/interview_exp). In that time I've gotten helpful criticism, comments that life is competitive, an offer to apply for a computational biology position, and a few nice offers to review my CV. Some have interpreted my post as me being frustrated and upset with the process, but that is incorrect. What I really wanted to do was shine light on a real life example of a real life individual going through the overall process and that when you clear a large number of hurdles, in the interview process, it can be very tough hearing, "You are not the right fit". At any rate, that is not the purpose of this post. In particular, when looking back on my time thus far as a postdoctoral research fellow, I should be thankful for what I have been able to accomplish. 

### What a Postdoc it has been
In just 2.25 years as a postdoctoral fellow I have managed to publish 2 first author manuscripts (one cited close to 40 times already) and have 2 more first author manuscripts getting very close to submission. I have also had 3 manuscripts in which I am co-author on from my PhD finally get published. Somehow I won the lottery and managed to snag a coveted CIHR Fellowship and a MICHR PTSP grant. Additionally, I have sat on two grant review panels (one local and one national) and reviewed for ~6  manuscripts (I can't remember the exact number anymore because of all the revisions that have happened) for various journals. I've also had the opportunity to teach with [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/), [Hour of Code](https://hourofcode.com/us), and [Wolverine Pathways](https://wolverinepathways.umich.edu/) which have been very rewarding programs to be involved with. So academically speaking I'm not sure I can top this year in productivity moving forward.

What do I have in my future? Well...I have two studies in the works that I am really excited about. My previous post inferred a little bit about the need to have a paper that says, "I can do metagenomics". Well that paper is coming in the new year and I'll be able to dedicate most of my time to it after the holidays. Exciting!! That is the only word I can describe it as since it combines 16S, metagenomics, computational software, short chain fatty acids, and colorectal cancer into one nice bundle. How's that for covering all the skills that are popular right now? The [other project](https://umhealthresearch.org/#studies/HUM00113700) will look at microbiota dynamics and is one that I started with Pat when I first arrived in Michigan. I really can't wait for the new year to get started. 

Although I took a slightly more neutral/pessimistic viewpoint on the job search in the last post, here, I want to take a more positive one. I don't think, for industry jobs, the year of the postdoc when you start getting interviews really means much, but on the flip side getting interviews early in your postdoc career, for academia, can be seen as promising (at least I like to think so). I have had three in-person interviews for faculty positions and I haven't yet reached my third year as a postdoctoral fellow. My first was this year and I was only 1.5 years into my postdoc. The second I ended up having a 50/50 shot of being chosen. The third...well we shall see. But I have learned **A LOT** from these interviews and each time has given me a chance to try new things and ultimately have much better conversations with faculty at each of the institutions I have visited.

### Some Reflections...

Ultimately, things are trending in the right direction. I have been fortunate and lucky throughout my short 8 years in research. I am rarely the smartest scientist in the room, nor am I the most clever. What I have been is lucky. I was lucky to get started in the microbiota field to begin with and lucky that my wife was okay with us moving so that I could train with [Pat](http://www.schlosslab.org/). I am fortunate to have had amazing mentors who I look up to and can try to mimic. Some may say that I work hard but I don't think I work harder than any one of my colleagues. During my PhD I knew many individuals that worked gruelling time courses because of their mouse experiments or tissue cultures. Yet, I graduated in 3 and they in 6 years. Some might chalk it up to making good choices -- but for the most part, as far as I know, no one completely chooses their PhD project. So I am thankful for just how truly lucky and fortunate I have been.

So who knows what 2018 will bring but I am excited for the projects that are going to be completed...I know I am going to do my very best to make it even better than 2017. Finally, I hope you and your family have an amazing holiday season and thank you for reading my blog. 
