---
layout: post
title: "Grandpa Peter: A tribute to an Immigrant"
date: 2018-06-29
tags: [generalblog]
---

Although I am heading home to celebrate a wedding, it also is going to be the last time I see my Grandpa Peter. Unfortunately, he has lost his second fight with cancer. Currently, flying back to Vancouver is bittersweet. I am happy for my friend’s upcoming marriage, sad for the inevitable passing of my grandpa, feeling joy for the celebration of love, and regret for not being able to spend more time with my grandpa over the last three years. I think all these feelings and thoughts are perfectly valid. However, instead of focusing on my emotions, I want to reflect on my grandpa’s life and use it in a constructive manner. Given the current political and social climate, I think the sacrifice my grandpa made so that I could be where I am today, is even more important now. The short version of this story is because he and my grandma wanted a better life for their offspring they made sacrifices, moved to a foreign country, and created divisions that still haven’t quite healed yet. 

Before beginning their journey to Canada, my grandpa and grandma had to make a tough choice: they could only bring one out of their four children with them. They had to choose ONE child and they chose my dad. This decision has caused conflict within my family and I don’t pretend to know why they made this decision or even how they arrived at it. What I do know from having to move to Ann Arbor from Vancouver is that being separated from your loved ones is hard. I can only imagine how difficult it must have been for my grandparents when they first arrived in Canada with only 1 out of their 4 children and not knowing how to speak the language. I can’t comprehend the perseverance and determination they must have had to make the move in the first place. From my privileged vantage point, to move from what you know to something completely foreign, solely on the possibility of a better life, seems crazy. Despite all these hurdles, my grandparents still decided to move. 

They worked very hard to give my dad opportunities that they never had. Ultimately, these opportunities would allow me to become the first person in my family to go to graduate school and then subsequently the first to get a MSc and PhD. My cousin will be the first to have an MD. I know I am privileged to be able to research possible ways of using the gut microbiota (a jargon-y term that means the microorganisms that live in your digestive tract) to treat colorectal cancer because of the sacrifices that my grandpa made. I am thankful for his original leap of faith and sacrifice because it ultimately resulted in where I am now. My story, I suspect, is far from special or unique as I know many immigrant families probably have similar experiences.

Moving to the United States to pursue microbiota research has made me a foreigner. In many respects, I am going through a milder version of what my grandpa went through many decades ago. When my grandpa first landed in Canada, he performed jobs that citizens did not want to do, even though they could have. Although I have a PhD and am in a job most Americans couldn’t do even if they wanted to, my grandpa and I share a common bond. Both of us are perceived as “stealing” jobs in the countries that we live. I am sad that instead of embracing the strength and diversity that comes with immigration, many people in Canada and the United States express a genuine desire to erect endless hurdles and barriers. Ideas, creativity, and curiosity are strengthened by the diversity that is brought by different backgrounds. Science, like any discipline, is strengthened by the diverse background of the individuals that work in the different fields of research.

I am thankful to have experienced a small piece of what life might have been like for my grandpa because it allows me to grow as a human being. Even as a Canadian, I have experienced how being different in the United States is associated with being illegal. I have been to a local bar in Ann Arbor where a customer sitting beside the register asked my wife and I in an intimidating tone, “Are you immigrants?” I have entered restaurants where every single person has stared at my wife and I because we looked different. My wife has been told that, “[they] did not know a Vietnamese person they could pay not to work [illegally]”. I can’t help but wonder if my grandpa, when he first arrived in Canada, experienced similar types of intolerance. One thing I do know though is that I feel closer to my grandpa having gone through this experience in the United States. 

When people see me, they don’t see a researcher working towards trying to improve people’s health, they first see me as Chinese, then upon closer inspection, Chinese-Canadian. I have learned that people have ingrained biases of who they consider Canadian and looking Asian doesn’t immediately fit that narrative. My wife has been told that, “she speaks English well for a Vietnamese person” though she was born and raised in Canada. I have had people ask, “Where are you from?” and I have responded “Canada,” which prompts the reply of, “Sure, but where are you actually from?” I know that whatever I experience in the United States, my grandpa also likely experienced a version of it when he first arrived in Canada.

A common argument I hear is that people are okay with legal immigration but not illegal immigration. Yet, illegal immigration has been going on ever since Europeans first colonized North America. In fact, many Americans are likely to be descendants of illegal immigrants and many other Americans came here by forced relocation rather than by choice. I used to be more of a hardliner on immigration, but my experiences and history have changed my mind. Who are we to judge someone for wanting a better life for their children? I am sure that if given the opportunity these children of immigrants will become the best and brightest that my home and adopted home country has to offer. Canada, America, and every other country in this world is at its best when it embraces the diversity within it and that is the most important lesson I learned from my grandpa’s experience. Thank you, grandpa, for taking that initial risk to move to a foreign land and giving me the opportunity to be who I am today.       

